To date, efforts to decode what people are thinking from their brain waves often relied on electrodes implanted in the cortex. New work used devices outside the head to pick up brain signals that enabled an AI system, as a subject typed, to accurately guess what they were typing.

What's new:  Researchers presented  Brain2Qwerty , a non-invasive method to translate brain waves into text. In addition, their work  shed light  on how the brain processes language. The team included people at Meta, Paris Sciences et Lettres University, Hospital Foundation Adolphe de Rothschild, Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language, Basque Foundation for Science, Aix-Marseille University, and Paris Cite University.

Gathering brainwave data:  The authors recorded the brain activity of 35 healthy participants who typed Spanish-language sentences. The participants were connected to either an electroencephalogram (EEG), which records the brain's electrical activity via electrodes on the scalp, or a magnetoencephalogram (MEG), which records magnetic activity through a device that surrounds the head but isn't attached. 15 participants used each device and five used both.

Participants were asked to read and memorize short sentences of 5 to 8 words. They were shown one word at a time. After a short waiting period, participants were asked to type the sentence. They could not see what they typed. The EEG dataset comprised around 4,000 sentences and 146,000 characters, while the MEG dataset comprised around 5,100 sentences and 193,000 characters.

Thoughts into text:  Brain2Qwerty used a system made up of a convolutional neural network, transformer, and a  9-gram character-level language model  pretrained on Spanish Wikipedia. The system classified the text a user typed from their brain activity. The authors trained separate systems on MEG and EEG data.

The convolutional neural network segmented brain activity into windows of 500 milliseconds each. The transformer took these windows as input and generated possible text characters and their probabilities. The two models learned to predict characters jointly. The pretrained language model, given the most recently predicted nine characters,  estimated the probability of the next character. At inference, the authors used a weighted average of probabilities from the transformer and language model. From that average, they computed the most likely sequence of characters as the final output.

Results.  The authors' MEG model achieved 32 percent character error rate (CER), much higher accuracy than the EEG competitors. Their EEG system outperformed  EEGNet , a model designed to process EEG data that had been trained on the authors' EEG data. It achieved 67 percent CER, while EEGNet achieved 78 percent CER.

Behind the news:  For decades, researchers have used learning algorithms to interpret various aspects of brain activity with varying degrees of success. In recent years, they've used neural networks to  generate   text  and  speech  from implanted electrodes, generate  images  of what  people see  while in an fMRI, and enable people to  control robots  using EEG signals.

Why it matters:  In research into interpreting brain signals, subjects who are outfitted with surgical implants typically have supplied the highest-quality brain signals. fMRI scans, while similarly noninvasive, are less precise temporally, which makes them less useful for monitoring or predicting language production. Effective systems based on MEG, which can tap brain signals precisely without requiring participants to undergo surgery, open the door to collecting far more data, training far more robust models, and conducting a wider variety of experiments.

We're thinking:  The privacy implications of such research may be troubling, but keep in mind that Brain2Qwerty's MEG system, which was the most effective approach tested, required patients to spend extended periods of time sitting still in a shielded room. We aren't going to read minds in the wild anytime soon.